once you're hit as hard as you can
hi I'm Luke Ryan for Joe Blow calm and
welcome to movie endings explained in
this episode we're going to be looking
at the 2013 mystery thriller prisoners
from director denis villeneuve we
previously covered another one of his
films on the series 2016's arrival which
is a film with a fairly complex ending
that needed to be unpacked somewhat but
with prisoners we once again find
ourselves looking down the barrel of a
fairly straightforward finale so as can
sometimes be the case with this series
it's more of a discussion than an
eye-opening explanation if you haven't
seen prisoners I highly recommend it
it's one of the best films of the decade
and is more than worth your time at two
and a half hours there's so much that
goes on in this film that we're just
going to skip to the end and assume that
you're fairly familiar with the film the
last 10 minutes of the movie sees Hugh
Jackman's character Keller Dover shot in
the leg and trapped in a concealed pit
underground left there by the woman who
abducted his daughter Holly Jones played
by Melissa Leo Holly and her husband
began abducting children when their own
son died seeing it as their war against
God to avenge him the first child that
they kidnapped was Alex played by Paul
Dano a mentally challenged young man who
was grown up now as Holly's own son
throughout the film he becomes the prime
suspect in the abduction case detective
Loki played superbly by Jake Gyllenhaal
realizes that Holly is the kidnapper and
confronts her
with Holly dead and Loki wounded he
races Dover's daughter Anna to the
hospital frantically having finally
found and saved her while Dover himself
is trapped underground and bleeding
Dover's disappearance isn't an immediate
cause for mortal concern however as he
is currently on the run from the police
it's assumed that he is fled not that he
is trapped or in any danger after
recovering from the rescue
Loki returns to the scene of the crimes
the Jones house where the forensics
teams are still currently working this
is where the film reaches its ambiguous
end
so what was the sound that Loki heard
very simply it was Dover in the pits
under the car whistling for help the
whistle in question is a long-standing
check-offs gun throughout the film the
concept itself refers to how every
elements of a story should contribute to
the whole the famous quote being if in
the first act of a story you have hung a
pistol on the wall in the following one
it should be fired in the opening 10
minutes of the film the first act Ana
asks her parents if she can go back to
their home along with her friend joy who
also ends up being kidnapped so that she
can look for her rescue whistle and it
takes until the very end of the third
act some two hours later for us to
actually reach the payoff to that set up
while dover is scrambling around in the
pit he finds his daughters red whistle
when Holly first forces dover into the
pit she comments that he might last 24
hours in her hope long enough to still
be alive when she dumps his daughter's
body in there with him pretty grim so we
can assume that by the time loki returns
to the house that roughly 24 hours have
passed we can also assume that dover has
no doubt tried whistling for help on and
off ever since then but surely the
forensics team would have heard
something right so maybe dover tried
whistling for quite some time to no
avail and passed out exhausted and in a
lot of pain and just as he came back
into consciousness down there he begins
to faintly whistle again holding on to
the last glimmer of life left inside him
right as loki happened to turn up
but when anna comes to see loki in the
hospital to thank him for being her hero
and saving her life he notices that she
has a red whistle around her neck he
comments on this to her mother
no she keeps insisting that Joey helped
her find it on Thanksgiving before they
were taken I think she's just confused
so she thinks her daughter was mistaken
and bought her a new whistle but Anna
had to have been telling the truth that
she did find her whistle as it was
almost waiting in that pit for her
father to get it there's been a fair bit
of analysis on this film focusing on the
concept that a lot of the characters are
in fact quote-unquote prisoners in some
shape or form literally in the case of
some metaphorically for others
external and internal prisons that these
characters find themselves in Alex Jones
for example is essentially a prisoner of
his own mind which isn't developed
enough to let anyone know that he is not
Holly's son and that he was taken by her
as a child
Loki is a prisoner of the case a study
and complete obsession which is
portrayed fairly bluntly in some moments
and at the end a little more subtly at
this point the case is closed the
abduction is solved the children are
back home he's still not satisfied
dov'è is the loose end in Loki's mind
it's still not complete he can only set
himself free by leaving no stone left
unturned or in Dover's case aboard
underneath a car over a hidden pits as
for Dover himself at least in the end he
finds himself literally imprisoned
inside the pits but it almost feels like
the film sets this up to be what he
deserves
Dover a stoutly religious man does what
any parent would do when their child is
kidnapped he doesn't take it very well
but beyond that he is grossly
dissatisfied with the help of the police
and he takes matters into his own hands
kidnapping Alex and brutally torturing
him with boiling hot water you've
probably heard the phrase I would do
anything to protect my children many
times before and it stands to reason
that a parent would be so driven to any
extreme to do so but Dover goes over the
edge and his potential final resting
place seems to be a
for his crimes Holley was operating
under her ideal of waging a war against
God and here is our highly religious
main character suffering for his sins
the Whistle emblematic of his daughter
comes across as something of a symbol of
hope and salvation for Dover
a token from his daughter a pure light
in his life that ended up driving him
into darkness reaching out to help him
in his moment of need there's actually a
lot to dig into with religion in the
film and even Loki's standing is
throughout the film you can see him with
occult symbols in the form of his
tattoos and also a ring that he wears
it's worth looking into and many many
videos could be made diving deeper into
this film with its conclusion though we
have to assume that loki finds dover
right it wouldn't be a particularly
happy ending as dover would no doubt
have to face the music
be arrested and serve his time for what
he has been driven to do the last
lingering shot of the film sees loki
looking in the direction of the pet he
hears the whistle there's really no
doubt he finds Dover
it's Loki we've seen his determination
throughout the entire film but removing
the actual physical act of seeing it
does add a touch of ambiguity we've
actually seen this before in less
obvious ways earlier in the film moments
where Villeneuve robs us of literal
payoffs to certain moments for example
when Loki rushes Anna to the hospital
running through the doors the scene
fades to black we never see the
emotional reunion between Anna and her
mother or Anna being treated in the
hospital we know it happens but we don't
necessarily need to be shown it either
by already establishing this
storytelling device of withholding
certain payoffs actually shown on screen
the ending is perfectly crafted to serve
this device however there was more of an
ending shot for prisoners the scene did
continue but this was more of a
fail-safe measure in case test audiences
felt more needed to be shown the
original ending as written was what we
see in the finished film here's what the
screenwriter Aaron Guzikowski had to say
on the matter
oddly enough that's how it was in the
script when it was bought and it never
really changed when we
shooting we did shoot a version where it
goes a little beyond where the fade-out
is there's a version where he moves the
car and sees Hugh down there and so on
none of us really wanted to do that
version but we wanted to make sure we
had it in case once the film was put
together it seemed like it really needed
it but I just think that's the moment
when the movie is ready to end you know
he's going to be taken out of the hole I
like it much better being ambiguous even
though you assume that's probably what's
going to happen I like that there's a
small chance that he's not going to get
him out of there for whatever reason the
screenwriter also commented on Dover's
fate after being rescued from the pits
beyond the final shot of the movie I
think unfortunately he would go to
prison the final irony his father was a
prison guard and the whole movie is
metaphors of people's internal prisons
and external prisons I believe that's
what would end up happening to him that
he would go to prison for some time so
what did you think of the ending to
prisoners did you enjoy the ambiguity of
not being explicitly shown what happens
after Loki hears the whistle or would
you prefer to see the actual act of Loki
uncovering the pit and finding dover
down there let us know down below and as
always thanks for watching
you